In this section we looked at blocks in Python and
saw how the level of indentation is crucial in determining
which block a line of code belongs to.
We then used if and else to test conditions
and only execute blocks of code
If those conditions were either True or False.
We created more complex conditions and saw how to use elif
to check several conditions in turn. Next,
we moved on to execute blocks of code repeatedly, using loops.
The first type of loop we used was the for statement.
It's used to iterate through a range of values.
for is used when you know in advance how many times you
want to go around the loop.
Next we looked at while loops. They're used to loop as long
as the condition is True. while loops are generally
used when you don't know in advance how many times
the loop should execute. We covered continue and break
to interrupt the normal flow of a for loop,
and else to define a block that always executes if the loop
finishes without break.
So this is a different use of the else keyword to how
it's used in an if statement, which is unfortunate
and can be confusing; but that's the keyword that was chosen.
A couple of videos weren't related to Python loops.
We digressed to look at augmented assignment and why
you should use it in preference to a normal assignment.
We also discussed Pep 8, and the style of your python code.
So we'll finish this section now with a short challenge,
just to give you a chance to practise what you've
learnt in the course so far.
You'll have a chance to make use of the string formatting,
that we covered in previous videos, as well
as reading in input that the user types at the keyboard.
You'll also get a chance to practise using
if to execute code depending on a condition.
So your challenge is to write a program to print a
number of options, and allow the user to select an
option from the list.
The options should be numbered from 1 to 9, although
you can use less than nine options if you want to.
Make sure that there are at least four options.
As an example, your program might look like the following.
So as you can see in this example, we've got a heading
at the top, we've got five options and a final option
also added, which is zero to exit the program.
So the program should continue looping, allowing the user
to choose one of the options each time around, and the
loop should only terminate when the user chooses zero.
If the user makes a valid choice, the program should
print a short message and the message should include
the value that they typed. Don't print
a different message for each choice.
The only thing that should change is the number they typed.
Although you could print out the description, I want to show you a much better way of doing that later.
We're keeping this simple because there's lots of things that we still haven't covered yet.
Now if their choice isn't one of the options in the menu,
nothing should be printed (although you can still
see their input on the screen). As an optional extra,
modify the program so that the menu is printed again,
If they choose an invalid option.
Be careful with that one.
You may start off by duplicating the code to print the
menu but it's possible to write the program without
duplicating the print lines.
So that's the challenge.
See how you go with that, and in the next
video we'll go through the solution.
See you in that next video.